Long distance: two outstanding European athletes

Speed competitions: the other side of racing

Share your sport story

Share your story →

Whether short or long distance, running has multiple incentives and rewards

Since prehistoric times, humans have been running. In those days, while hunting animals, the main reward was catching the hunted prey.

Nowadays, however, when the main motivation is no longer subsistence, people have continued to race, with athletics coming to be considered the oldest organised sport in the world.

Running has multiple incentives and rewards, both physical and psychological. On the psychological side, we can find incentives such as beating a new personal best, enjoying a beautiful landscape, breathing fresh air in nature, winning a competition or simply finishing a race. As for the physical aspect, there are lots of health goals that can go from losing weight to lowering blood sugar levels.

Regardless of what each person's main incentive is, running will reward you with a sense of well-being and better sleep after reviving the body.

Long distance running race types are 5,000 metres, 10,000 metres and the marathon. The middle distance races recognised by the World Athletics are 800 metres and 1,500 metres.

In the first editions of the modern Olympics, Paavo Nurmi (1897- 1973) - known as the ‘Flying Finn’ - stood out. Nurmi was a specialist in medium and long distance runs. His childhood was spent in a small cabin in the woods, where he was forced to follow a diet based on vegetables and dried fish, which, together with the cold Finnish winters, was key to developing his great resistance.

Although he won many Olympic races, his prominent triumphs were in Antwerp 1920 (10,000 m), Paris 1924 (5,000m) and Amsterdam 1928 (10,000 m). Nurmi introduced the regular stride technique, setting the pace on the stopwatch and distributing his energy evenly throughout the races.

Another prominent athlete, Emil Zátopek, was nicknamed the ‘Czech Locomotive’. With 5 Olympic golds and 18 world records, he was a world star in the early 1950s. In the 10,000 metres, over the course of six years, he dominated and revolutionised his sport. His three golds in long distance running at the 1952 Helsinki Olympics (including his victorious marathon debut) is a feat that will unlikely be repeated in history.

In contrast to the privileged athletes who had previously dominated the Olympic competition, Zatopek grew up in poverty. His training system, developed by himself, consisted of a large volume of interval training. Although he was derided at first, his success transformed the training methods of long-distance athletes.

In athletics, the opposite of endurance races are speed sprints: 100, 200 and 400 metres, as well as hurdle races: 110 and 400 metres. The emotion generated in a few seconds attracts many fans to races.

In Europe, there have been great athletes who dominated these speed tests. Two stand out especially: the Italian Pietro Mennea, famous for his legendary world record of 200 metres which stood for 17 years, and the Ukrainian Valery Borzov, who dominated speed races during the early 1970s. Both were Olympic champions.

Since antiquity, women in sports events have been discriminated against and marginalised. At the ancient Olympics, women were prohibited from taking part - although there was a female-only version of the Olympic games called the Hereos Games (in honour of the goddess Hera).

It was not until 1928, at the Olympics held in Amsterdam, that women first took part in athletics competitions, with very few participants compared to men. Equality with men has not truly come to the Olympics yet - in the 2012 London Olympics, women were 45% of the participants.

European female athletes have stood out brilliantly on the world athletics scene, including the German sprinter Marita Koch, the Russian middle distance runner Svetlana Masterkova and the Portuguese marathon runner Rosa Mota, to name just a few.

Cross country (also called simply cross) is a form of athletics that consists of traveling distances in non-urban natural circuits, mountains, forests, etc.

At the beginning of the 20th century, it was within the Olympic program. It has become a very popular race, particularly at amateur levels.

Also, in recent times there has been a boom in popular, public races. In the 1970s, big cities began to organise large popular marathons where anybody could take part. Berlin’s marathon is one of the most prestigious. Its first edition was held in 1973 and, on average, around 40,000 runners take part.

Other well-known popular races are San Silvestres, which are run on December 31 in various parts of the world. It is worth noting that popular races are frequently used to promote solidarity or some commercial objectives.



Popular race in Madrid, 1989, Archivo de la Ciudad de Arganda del Rey, CC BY ND

The triathlon consists of three disciplines in a row in the same event: swimming, cycling and running. Specific distances and features may vary by tournament. The Ironman is a long distance triathlon that ends with a marathon race. It is a very hard test - just finishing it is already quite a challenge.

Within the Ironman, we highlight an exceptional case outside the professional elite of athletics.

Ramón Arroyo is a Spanish citizen who was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 2004 at the age of 32. After a few depressing years, he decided to cope with the disease through physical exercise, and managed to finish an Ironman in Barcelona in 2013. He has written an autobiography titled 'Surrendering is not an option' and, in 2016, his life was brought to the big screen with the movie '100 meters'.



Can you help us to tell the story of sport in Europe in the past and the present?

We invite you to tell us about your sport experiences through objects like photographs, memorabilia, equipment or prizes.

This blog post is a part of theEuropeana Common Cultureproject, which explores varied aspects of our shared cultural heritage across Europe.

--------------------------------------------------

Talented opera singer who enjoyed worldwide fame in the 19th century

In the 2017 Hollywood filmThe Greatest Showman, there is a show-stopping moment when the main character P T Barnum watches a musical performance by Swedish singer Jenny Lind.

While the film's story takes dramatic license with the story of Barnum's circus, the real Jenny Lind was a hugely talented Swedish opera singer who took the USA by storm in the 1850s.

Born in Stockholm on 6 October 1820, Lind's talent was discovered when she was over-heard singing by the maid of Mademoiselle Lundberg, the principal dancer at the Royal Swedish Opera. The maid retuned the next day with Lundberg who arranged for Lind to have an audition for the Royal Dramatic Theatre.

Aged 10, Jenny Lind started to play in more than 30 spoken roles, with her first starring role coming when she was aged just 17 - playing Agathe in Weber's Der Freischütz. By 20, she was a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music and court singer to the King of Sweden and Norway.

Throughout her teenage years and early 20s, Lind's voice became damaged, but studying with music teacher Manuel Garcia in Paris, she learned healthier and safer vocal techniques.

Through the 1840s, Lind toured extensively, performing in cities and countries across Europe - Denmark, Berlin, Vienna, London - becoming an international star with the nickname 'the Swedish Nightingale'.

In 1849, PT Barnum approached her with an offer to tour the USA.

Realising it could benefit her favourite charities in Sweden, Lind agreed. Barnum was a master of publicity, promoting her tour well before she arrived in New York. The tour was a huge success, with Lind performing 93 concerts for Barnum. After a year, she began to tire of Barnum's relentless publicity and parted ways with him, but continued touring under her own management for almost another year.

This is the tour depicted inThe Greatest Showman, but there's no historical evidence of a romance between Barnum and Lind (as implied in the film).

Near the end of the tour, in February 1852, Lind married her pianist and conductor Otto Goldschmidt. They returned to Europe, living first in Germany and, from 1858, in England. Between 1853 and 1861, the couple had three children.

From then on, she performed in concert halls rather than grand opera houses. In 1882, she was appointed professor of singing at the newly founded Royal College of Music.

In 1887, Lind died aged 67. The technology of the time means that, despite her long and successful career, no recordings of her voice were made or remain today.

Her talent and fame are remembered today in the name 'The Swedish Nightingale' and commemorated in music and films, placenames and statues and even toys, banknotes and ship figureheads.

--------------------------------------------------

Trude Pritzi

Richard Bergmann

Teenage table tennis world champions from Vienna

A table tennis hall in the heart of Vienna’s 8th district is probably the world’s oldest. The hall, at Lange Gasse 69, dates back to the 19th century - when men played table tennis in tail-coats.

With more than a hundred years of history, it was where several Austrian world champions trained and played.

This was where one of the most-known world champions, Trude Pritzi, learnt and revolutionised table tennis. In her career, Trude won 14 world championship medals - five golds, two silvers and six bronzes.

Aged 17, Trude Pritzi made it to the finals of the 1937 World Table Tennis Championship in Baden, Germany.

Her match against the reigning champion Ruth Aarons from the United States was defensive. Pritzi and Aarons played for 100 minutes with their extensive and exhaustive rallies forcing the jury to abandon the game and vacate the championship.

This was the first and only time such a decision was taken in competitive table tennis. The judges wished that table tennis be seen as an active and energetic sport, rather than merely defensive.

In March 1938, a few weeks before the Anschluss when Nazi Germany annexed Austria, Pritzi won her ‘first’ World Championship Gold Medal in Wembley, London - without losing a single set.

After the Anschluss, at the 1939 World Championships in Cairo, Egypt, Pritzi played for the team of Nazi Germany. There, she won four World Championship medals including silver in the singles and gold in the doubles.

After World War II, Pritzi resumed playing for Austria - winning a bronze and gold medal in the singles and doubles competitions at the 1947 championships in Paris. Her last world championship medal came in 1953 - a bronze medal as a member of the Austrian team.

In 2001, 33 years after Pritzi’s death, Pritzi and Aarons were posthumously named ‘co-champions’ of the 1937 championship by the International Table Tennis Federation.

In the days before World War II, Pritzi spoke of feeling like a professional sportswoman and continuing to play. After the war, Pritzi mentioned in interviews that she ‘was completely exhausted that many of her colleagues had to flee’.

Richard Bergmann was one of those who had to flee.

He had played in the same table tennis hall where Pritzi played and won an individual gold medal in the 1937 World Championships as well as a silver in the doubles competition. At 17, Bergmann was the youngest person to win a single world champion title - an accomplishment he still holds.

In 1938, following the Anschluss, Jewish Bergmann, like many other outstanding Jewish table tennis players, fled Vienna and went to London. Competing from then onwards for England, he won 16 medals over the remainder of his career - including two golds in the singles and doubles competitions at the 1939 World Championships.

Both Richard Bergmann and Trude Pritzi were just 17 years old when they won their first World Champion titles, with both beginning their careers at that same Viennese table tennis centre - a centre which continues to this day.

This blog post is a part of theEuropeana Common Cultureproject, which explores varied aspects of our shared cultural heritage across Europe.

--------------------------------------------------

This year we’re spending more of our lives online than ever before. The Internet is where we work, play and interact with others. Many of the reactions, comments, messages that we post contain GIFs – the short animations that compliment our conversations, convey reactions and let us quickly express ourselves.

So what better time to welcome back GIF IT UP, the annual GIF-making contest that brings together cultural heritage, creativity and fun. From 1–31 October, we’re calling on GIF-makers and cultural enthusiasts around the world to create new GIFs by remixing open access cultural heritage material.

via GIPHY

This year, along with Europeana, Digital Public Library of America, Digital NZ and Trove, two new content partners are joining the fun –Japan Search, a platform giving access to digitised material from cultural institutions across Japan, andDAG Museumsin Kolkata. So there’ll be more inspiring and diverse content to reuse and remix than ever before, and an opportunity for more people to join in.

via GIPHY

Want to make your video calls, parties and family gatherings more fun? Then check out this year’s specialGIPHY Backdropscompetition category. Get your creative juices flowing and spice up these online meetings!

via GIPHY

1. Find an inspiring piece of copyright-free or openly licensed material from Europeana, DPLA, Trove, DigitalNZ, Japan Search and DAG Museums

2. Create an awesome GIF (Don’t know how? No worries – we havelots of resourcesto get you started.)

3. Submit your GIF for a chance to win great prizes

4. Share your creation on social media using the hashtag #GIFITUP2020

via GIPHY

Visit the contest'sGIPHY channeland follow #GIFITUP2020 on social media for a daily dose of digital art that will brighten your day. Share them with your friends and cheer on the creators! At the end of the competition, you’ll have a chance to vote for your favourite submissions and help them win the Public Choice Award. Find out more and submit your gif on thecompetition’s website.

--------------------------------------------------

Share your sport story

Share your story →

Champion of the world in the 1930s

German boxer Max Schmeling was one of the first Europeans to be world heavyweight boxing champion of the world, winning first in 1930. Through the 1930s, his successful boxing career ran parallel to the rise of Nazi Germany, with political overtones to his athletic achievements.

Born in September 1905, Max Schmeling was the son of a Hamburg sailor. He began boxing in amateur competitions. By 1924, he had won Germany's national amateur title in the light heavyweight division.

Embarking on a professional boxing career, Schmeling won and retained multiple German championships. In 1927, Schmeling won the European championship against Belgian boxer Fernand Delarge.

The following year, he retained his European and German championship titles and decided to compete for bigger matches and prizes in the United States.

By 1930, Schmeling had won the world heavyweight championship. His victory wasn't convincing, as he was the first boxer to win the title by disqualification, after his opponent Jack Sharkey, an American boxer of Lithuanian heritage, knocked him down with a low blow in the fourth round.

Nonetheless, Schmeling was the world heavyweight champion between 1930 and 1932. He lost the title to Sharkey in 1932, who won by a controversial decision.

In 1933, German Schmeling's match with American boxer of Jewish heritage Max Baer set the tone for the next decade of his boxing career. Schmeling became associated with the Nazi party's rise in Germany, with many seeing Schmeling as a puppet of Nazi Germany.

His matches against black American boxer Joe Louis in the late 1930s went far beyond sport, becoming stages where international politics and race relations were played out.

In June 1936, Schmeling knocked out Louis in the 12th round of their match. The Nazi Party attempted to capitalise on Schmeling’s victory for propaganda, promoting Schmeling as a representative of their ideologies. Films showed the match, Hitler reacting to the match, and Schmeling was hailed as a hero on his return to Germany.

However, despite meeting Hitler and Goebbels on multiple occasions and how he was viewed in the United States, Schmeling never became a member of the Nazi party and vowed to remain apolitical. He continued his professional relationship with his Jewish-American manager, Joe Jacobs, and even sheltered two Jewish boys (the young sons of his friend David Lewin) in his apartment in Berlin during the Kristallnacht in November 1938.

In 1938, Schmeling again faced Louis in an eagerly-anticipated match in New York.

Louis knocked out Schmeling two minutes into the first round. When it became clear that Schmeling would lose, the radio broadcast of the fight in Germany ended. Schmeling was taken to hospital, with two broken vertebrae. His return to Germany had none of the ceremony that had greeted him in 1936.

During World War II, Schmeling served with the Luftwaffe as a paratrooper. In May 1941, he was injured parachuting during the invasion of Crete in 1941.

After the war, Schmeling returned to boxing in 1947–48, winning three of five fights in Germany before retiring permanently in 1948, aged 43.

Schmeling later worked for Coca-Cola, which made him a wealthy man and he became known as a generous philanthropist. In the 1970s, he published his autobiography. Schmeling died in 2005 aged 99, the longest living heavyweight boxing champion in history.



Can you help us to tell the story of sport in Europe in the past and the present?

We invite you to tell us about your sport experiences through objects like photographs, memorabilia, equipment or prizes.